THE DOORS OF PERCEPTION



by

Aldous Huxley (1894-1963)



2



It was in 1886 that the German pharmaeologist, Louis Lewin, pubhshed the first
systematie study of the eactus, to whieh his own name was subsequently given.
Anhalonium lewinii was new to seienee.  To primitive rehgion and the Indians of
Mexieo and the Ameiiean Southwest it was a friend of immemoriaUy long standing.
Indeed, it was mueh more than a friend. In the words of one of the early Spanish
visitors to the New World, "they eat a root whieh they eall peyote, and whieh
they venerate as though it were a deity."

Why they should have venerated it as a deity beeame apparent when sueh eminent
psyehologists as Jaenseh, Haveloek EUis and Weir MiteheU began their experiments
with meseahn, the aetive piineiple of peyote. Tme, they stopped short at a point
well this side of idolatry; but aU eoneurred in assigning to mesealin a position
among dmgs of unique distinetion. Administered in suitable doses, it ehanges the
quahty of eonseiousness more profoundly and yet is less toxie than any other
substanee in the pharmaeologisfs repertory.

Mesealin researeh has been going on sporadieaUy ever sinee the days of Lewin and
Haveloek Elli s.  Chemists have not merely isolated the alkaloid; they have
learned how to synthesize it, so that the supply no longer depends on the sparse
and intermittent erop of a desert eaetus. Alienists have dosed themselves with
meseahn in the hope thereby of eoming to a better, a first-hand, understanding
of their patients' mental proeesses. Working unfortunately upon too few subjeets
within too narrow a range of eireumstanees, psyehologists have observed and
eatalogued some of the drug's more striking effeets.  Neurologists and
physiologists have found out something about the meehanism of its aetion upon
the eentral nervous system. And at least one Professional philosopher has taken
mesealin for the hght it may throw on sueh aneient, unsolved riddles as the
plaee of mind in nature and the relationship between brain and eonseiousness*.

There matters rested until, two or three years ago, a new and perhaps highly
signifieant faet was observed^. Aetually the faet had been staring everyone in
the faee for several deeades; but nobody, as it happened, had notieed it until a
Young Enghsh psyehiatiist, at present working in Canada, was stmek by the elose
similarity, in ehemieal eomposition, between meseahn and adrenahn. Eurther
researeh



1 See the following papers: ''Schizophrenia. A New Approach." By Humphry Osmond
and John Smythies. Journal of Mental Science. Vol. XCVIII. April, 1952.

"On Being Mad." By Humphry Osmond. Saskarchewan Psychiatric Services Journal.
Vol. I. No. 2. September.  1952. "The Mesealin Phenomena." By John Smythies. The
British Journal of the Philosophy of Science. Vol. III.  February, 1953.
"Schizophrenia: A New Approach." By Abeam Hoffer, Humphry Osmond and John
Smythies. journal of Mental Science. Vol. C. No. 418. January, 1954.

Numerous other papers on the biochemistry, pharmacology, psychology and
neurophysiology of schizophrenia sad the mesealin phenomena are in preparation

2 In his monograph, Menomini Peyolism, published (December 1952) in the
Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, Professor J. S. Slotkin has
written that "the habitual use of Peyote does not seem to produce any increased
tolerance or dependence. I know many people who have been Peyotists for forty to
fifty years. The amount of Peyote they use depends upon the solemnity of the
occasion; in general they do not take any more Peyote now than they did years
ago. Also, there is sometimes an interval of a month or more between rites, and
they go without Peyote during this period without feeling any craving for it.
Personally, even after a series of rites occurring on four successive weekends.
I neither increased the amount of Peyote consumed nor felt any continued need
for it." It is evidently with good reason that "Peyote has never been legally
declared a narcotic, or its use prohibited by the federal government." However,
"during the long history of Indian-white contact, white officials have usually
tried to suppress the use of Peyote, because it has been conceived to violate
their own mores. But these at- tempts have always failed." In a footnote Dr.
Slotkin adds that "it is amazing to hear the fantastic stories about the effects
of Peyote and the nature of the ritual, which are told by the white and Catholic
Indian officials in the Menomini Reservation. None of them have had the
slightest first-hand experience with the plant or with the religion, yet some
fancy themselves to be authorities and write official reports on the subject."




3



revealed that lysergic acid, an extremely potent hallucinogen derived from
ergot, has a stmctural biochemical relationship to the others. Then came the
discovery that adrenochrome, which is a product of the decomposition of
adrenahn, can produce many of the symptoms observed in mescalin intoxication.
But adrenochrome probably occurs spontaneously in the human body. In other
words, each one of us may be capable of manufacturing a chemical, minute doses
of which are known to cause Profound changes in consciousness. Certain of these
changes are similar to those which occur in that most characteristic plague of
the twentieth century, schizophrenia. Is the mental disorder due to a chemical
disorder? And is the chemical disorder due, in its turn, to psychological
distresses affecting the adrenals? It would be rash and premature to af fir m
it. The most we can say is that some kind of a piima facie case has been made
out. Meanwhile the clue is being systematically followed, the sleuths -
biochemists , psychiatrists, psychologists - are on the trail.

By a series of, for me, extremely fortunate circumstances I found myself, in the
spring of 1953, squarely athwart that trail. One of the sleuths had come on
business to Cahfomia. In spite of seventy years of mescalin research, the
psychological material at his disposal was still absurdly inadequate, and he was
anxious to add to it. I was on the spot and willing, indeed eager, to be a
guinea pig. Thus it came about that, one bright May morning, I swallowed
four-tenths of a gram of mescahn dissolved in half a glass of water and sat down
to wait for the results.

We live together, we act on, and react to, one another; but always and in all
circumstances we are by ourselves. The martyrs go hand in hand into the arena;
they are cmcified alone. Embraced, the lovers desperately try to fuse their
insulated ecstasies into a single self-transcendence; in vain. By its very
nature every embodied spirit is doomed to suffer and enjoy in sohtude.
Sensations, feehngs, insights, fancies - all these are private and, except
through symbols and at second hand, incommunicable. We can pool information
about experiences, but never the experiences themselves. From family to nation,
every human group is a society of island universes. Most island universes are
sufficiently like one another to Permit of inferential understanding or even of
mutual empathy or "feeling into." Thus, remembering our own bereavements and
humihations, we can condole with others in analogous circumstances, can put
ourselves (always, of course, in a shghtly Pickwickian sense) in their places.
But in certain cases communication between universes is incomplete or even
nonexistent. The mind is its own place, and the Places inhabited by the insane
and the exceptionally gifted are so different from the places where ordinary men
and women hve, that there is little or no common ground of memory to serve as a
basis for understanding or fellow feehng. Words are uttered, but fail to
enhghten. The things and events to which the symbols refer belong to mutually
exclusive realms of experience.

To see ourselves as others see us is a most salutary gift. Hardly less important
is the capacity to see others as they see themselves. But what if these others
belong to a different species and inhabit a radically ahen universe? For
example, how can the sane get to know what it actually feels like to be mad? Or,
short of being bom again as a visionary, a medium, or a musical genius, how can
we ever visit the worlds which, to Blake, to Swedenborg, to Johann Sebastian
Bach, were home? And how can a man at the extreme li mits of ectomorphy and
cerebrotonia ever put himself in the place of one at the limits of endomorphy
and viscerotonia, or, except within certain circumscribed areas, share the
feelings of one who stands at the li mits of mesomorphy and somatotonia? To the
unmitigated behavioiist such questions, I suppose, are meaningless. But for
those who theoretically beheve what in practice they know to be hue - namely,
that there is an inside to experience as well as an outside - the problems posed
are real problems, all the more grave for being, some completely insoluble, some
soluble only in exceptional circumstances and by methods not available to
everyone. Thus, it seems virtually certain that I shall never know what it feels
hke to be Sir John Falstaff or Joe Fouis. On the other hand, it had




4



always seemed to me possible that, through hypnosis, for example, or
autohypnosis, by means of systematic meditation, or else by taking the
appropriate dmg, I might so change my ordinary mode of consciousness as to be
able to know, from the inside, what the visionary, the medium, even the mystic
were talking about.

From what I had read of the mescalin experience I was convinced in advance that
the dmg would admit me, at least for a few hours, into the kind of inner world
described by Blake and AE. But what I had expected did not happen. I had
expected to he with my eyes shut, looking at visions of many- colored
geometries, of animated architectures, rich with gems and fabulously lovely, of
landscapes with heroic figures, of symbohc dramas trembling perpetuaUy on the
verge of the ultimate revelation. But I had not reckoned, it was evident, with
the idiosyncrasies of my mental make-up, the facts of my temperament, training
and habits.

I am and, for as long as I can remember, I have always been a poor visuahzer.
Words, even the pregnant words of poets, do not evoke pictures in my mind. No
hypnagogic visions greet me on the verge of sleep. When I recall something, the
memory does not present itself to me as a vividly seen event or object. By an
effort of the wiU, I can evoke a not very vivid image of what happened yesterday
afternoon, of how the Lungamo used to look before the bridges were destroyed, of
the Bayswater Road when the only buses were green and tiny and drawn by aged
horses at three and a half miles an hour. But such images have httle substance
and absolutely no autonomous fife of their own. They stand to real, perceived
objects in the same relation as Homer's ghosts stood to the men of flesh and
blood, who came to visit them in the shades. Only when I have a high temperature
do my mental images come to independent fife. To those in whom the faculty of
visu aliz ation is strong my inner world must seem curiously drab, lim ited and
uninteresting. This was the world - a poor thing but my own - which I expected
to see transformed into something completely u nlik e itself.

The change which actually took place in that world was in no sense
revolutionary. Half an hour after swallowing the dmg I became aware of a slow
dance of golden fights. A little later there were sumptuous red surfaces
swelling and expanding from bright nodes of energy that vibrated with a
continuously changing, patterned fife. At another time the closing of my eyes
revealed a complex of gray stmctures, within which pale bluish spheres kept
emerging into intense solidity and, having emerged, would slide noiselessly
upwards, out of sight. But at no time were there faces or forms of men or
animals. I saw no landscapes, no enormous spaces, no magical growth and
metamorphosis of buildings, nothing remotely like a drama or a parable. The
other world to which mescalin admitted me was not the world of visions; it
existed out there, in what I could see with my eyes open. The great change was
in the realm of objective fact. What had happened to my subjective universe was
relatively unimportant.

I took my pill at eleven. An hour and a half later, I was sitting in my study,
looking intently at a small glass vase. The vase contained only three flowers-a
full-blown Belie of Portugal rose, shell pink with a hint at every petal's base
of a hotter, flamier hue; a large magenta and cream-colored carnation; and, pale
purple at the end of its broken stalk, the bold heraldic blossom of an iris.
Fortuitous and provisional, the little nosegay broke all the mles of traditional
good taste. At breakfast that morning I had been shuck by the lively dissonance
of its colors. But that was no longer the point. I was not looking now at an
unusual flower arrangement. I was seeing what Adam had seen on the morning of
his creation-the miracle, moment by moment, of naked existence.

"Is it agreeable?" somebody asked. (During this Part of the experiment, all
conversations were recorded on a dictating machine, and it has been possible for
me to refresh my memory of what was said.)

"Neither agreeable nor disagreeable," I answered, "it just is."




5



Istigkeit - wasn't that the word Meister Eckhart l ik ed to use? "Is-ness." The
Being of Platonie philosophy - exeept that Plate seems to have made the
enormous, the grotesque mistake of separating Being from beeoming and
identifying it with the mathematieal abstraetion of the Idea. He eould never,
poor fellow, have seen a buneh of flowers shining with their own inner hght and
aU but quivering under the pressure of the significanee with whieh they were
eharged; eould never have pereeived that what rose and iris and eamation so
intensely signified was nothing more, and nothing less, than what they were - a
transienee that was yet eternal hfe, a perpetual perishing that was at the same
time pure Being, a bundle of minute, unique partieulars in whieh, by some
unspeakable and yet self-evident paradox, was to be seen the divine souree of aU
existenee.

I eontinued to look at the flowers, and in their hving hght I seemed to deteet
the quahtative equivalent of breathing -but of a breathing without returns to a
starting point, with no reeurrent ebbs but only a repeated flow from beauty to
heightened beauty, from deeper to ever deeper meaning. Words like "graee" and
"transfiguration" eame to my mind, and this, of eourse, was what, among other
things, they stood for. My eyes traveled from the rose to the eamation, and from
that feathery ineandeseenee to the smooth seroUs of sentient amethyst whieh were
the iris. The Beatifie Vision, Sat Chit Ananda, Being- Awareness-Bliss-for the
first time I understood, not on the verbal level, not by inehoate hints or at a
distanee, but preeisely and eompletely what those prodigious syllables referred
to. And then I remembered a passage I had read in one of Suzuki's essays. "What
is the Dharma-Body of the Buddha?" ('"the Dharma-Body of the Buddha" is another
way of saying Mind, Suehness, the Void, the Godhead.) The question is asked in a
Zen monastery by an earnest and bewildered noviee. And with the prompt
irrelevanee of one of the Marx Brothers, the Master answers, "The hedge at the
bottom of the garden." "And the man who re alize s this fruth," the noviee
dubiously inquires, "'what, may I ask, is he?" Groueho gives him a whaek over
the shoulders with his staff and answers, "A golden-haired hon."

It had been, when I read it, only a vaguely pregnant pieee of nonsense. Now it
was aU as elear as day, as evident as EueUd. Of eourse the Dharma-Body of the
Buddha was the hedge at the bottom of the garden. At the same time, and no less
obviously, it was these flowers, it was anything that I - or rather the blessed
Not-I, released for a moment from my throttUng embraee - eared to look at. The
books, for example, with whieh my study waUs were lined. Eik e the flowers, they
glowed, when I looked at them, with brighter eolors, a profounder signifieanee.
Red books, like rubies; emerald books; books bound in white jade; books of
agate; of aquamarine, of yeUow topaz; lapis lazuli books whose eolor was so
intense, so intrinsieaUy meaningful, that they seemed to be on the point of
leaving the shelves to thmst themselves more insistently on my attention.

"What about spatial relationships?" the investigator inquired, as I was looking
at the books.

It was diffieult to answer. Tme, the perspeetive looked rather odd, and the
walls of the room no longer seemed to meet in right angles. But these were not
the reaUy important faets. The reaUy important faets were that spatial
relationships had eeased to matter very mueh and that my mind was pereeiving the
world in terms of other than spatial eategoiies. At ordinary times the eye
eoneems itself with sueh problems as Where? - How far? How situated in relation
to what? In the meseaUn experience the implied questions to which the eye
responds are of another order. Place and distance cease to be of much interest.
The mind does its Perceiving in terms of intensity of existence, profundity of
significance, relationships within a pattern. I saw the books, but was not at aU
concerned with their positions in space. What I noticed, what impressed itself
upon my mind was the fact that aU of them glowed with hving hght and that in
some the glory was more manifest than in others. In this context position and
the three dimensions were beside the point. Not, of course, that the category of
space had been abolished.  When I got up and walked about, I could do so quite
normaUy, without misjudging the whereabouts of




6



objects. Space was still there; but it had lost its predominance. The mind was
primarily concerned, not with measures and locations, but with being and
meaning.

And along with indifference to space there went an even more complete
indifference to time. "There seems to be plenty of it," was all I would answer,
when the investigator asked me to say what I felt about time. Plenty of it, but
exactly how much was entirely irrelevant. I could, of course, have looked at my
watch; but my watch, I knew, was in another universe. My actual experience had
been, was still, of an indefinite duration or alternatively of a perpetual
present made up of one continually changing apocalypse.

From the books the investigator directed my attention to the furniture. A small
typing table stood in the center of the room; beyond it, from my point of view,
was a wicker chair and beyond that a desk.  The three pieces formed an intricate
pattern of horizontals, uprights and diagonals - a pattern all the more
interesting for not being interpreted in terms of spatial relationships. Table,
chair and desk came together in a composition that was like something by Braque
or Juan Gris, a stiU hfe recognizably related to the objective world, but
rendered without depth, without any attempt at photographic reahsm. I was
looking at my furniture, not as the utihtarian who has to sit on chairs, to
write at desks and tables, and not as the cameraman or .scientific recorder, but
as the pure aesthete whose concern is only with forms and their relationships
within the field of vision or the picture space. But as I looked, this purely
aesthetic, Cubisf s-eye view gave place to what I can only describe as the
sacramental vision of reahty. I was back where I had been when I was looking at
the flowers-back in a world where everything shone with the Inner Light, and was
infinite in its significance. The legs, for example, of that chair - how
miraculous their tubularity, how supernatural their pohshed smoothness! I spent
several minutes - or was it several centuries? - not merely gazing at those
bamboo legs, but actually being them - or rather being myself in them; or, to be
stiU more accurate (for "I" was not involved in the case, nor in a certain sense
were "they") being my Not-self in the Not-self which was the chair.

Reflecting on my experience, I find myself agreeing with the eminent Cambridge
philosopher. Dr. C.  D. Broad, "that we should do well to consider much more
seriously than we have hitherto been inchned to do the type of theory which
Bergson put forward in connection with memory and sense perception.  The
suggestion is that the function of the brain and nervous system and sense organs
is in the main e lim inative and not productive. Each person is at each moment
capable of remembering all that has ever happened to him and of perceiving
everything that is happening everywhere in the universe. The function of the
brain and nervous system is to protect us from being overwhelmed and confused by
this mass of largely useless and irrelevant knowledge, by shutting out most of
what we should otherwise perceive or remember at any moment, and leaving only
that very small and special selection which is lik ely to be practically
useful." According to such a theory, each one of us is potentially Mind at
Large. But in so far as we are animals, our business is at all costs to survive.
To make biological survival possible. Mind at Large has to be funneled through
the reducing valve of the brain and nervous system. What comes out at the other
end is a measly trickle of the kind of consciousness which will help us to stay
ahve on the surface of this Particular planet. To formulate and express the
contents of this reduced awareness, man has invented and endlessly elaborated
those symbol-systems and imphcit philosophies which we call languages. Every
individual is at once the beneficiary and the victim of the hnguistic tradition
into which he has been bom - the beneficiary inasmuch as language gives access
to the accumulated records of other people's experience, the victim in so far as
it co nfir ms him in the behef that reduced awareness is the only awareness and
as it bedevils his sense of reahty, so that he is all too apt to take his
concepts for data, his words for actual things. That which, in the language of
rehgion, is caUed "this world" is the universe of reduced awareness, expressed,
and, as it were, petrified by language. The various "other




7



worlds," with which human beings erratically make contact are so many elements
in the totahty of the awareness belonging to Mind at Large. Most people, most of
the time, know only what comes through the reducing valve and is consecrated as
genuinely real by the local language. Certain persons, however, seem to be bom
with a kind of by-pass that circumvents the reducing valve. In others temporary
by- passes may be acquired either spontaneously, or as the result of deliberate
"spiritual exercises," or through hypnosis, or by means of dmgs. Through these
permanent or temporary by-passes there flows, not indeed the perception "of
everything that is happening everywhere in the universe" (for the by-pass does
not abolish the reducing valve, which stiU excludes the total content of Mind at
Large), but something more than, and above ah something different from, the
carefully selected utihtarian material which our narrowed, individual minds
regard as a complete, or at least sufficient, picture of reahty.

The brain is provided with a number of enzyme systems whieh serve to co-ordinate
its workings.  Some of these enzymes regulate the supply of glucose to the brain
eeUs. Mescahn inhibits the production of these enzymes and thus lowers the
amount of glucose available to an organ that is in constant need of sugar. When
mescahn reduces the brain's normal ration of sugar what happens? Too few cases
have been observed, and therefore a comprehensive answer cannot yet be given.
But what happens to the majority of the few who have taken mescahn under
supervision can be summarized as follows.

The abihty to remember and to "think straight" is htde if at ah reduced.
(Listening to the recordings of my conversation under the influence of the dmg,
I cannot discover that I was then any stupider than I am at ordinary times.)

Visual impressions are greatly intensified and the eye recovers some of the
perceptual innoeence of childhood, when the sensum was not immediately and
automaticahy subordinated to the concept.  Interest in space is diminished and
interest in time fahs almost to zero.

Though the intehect remains unimpaired and though perception is enormously
improved, the wih suffers a profound ehange for the worse. The mescahn taker
sees no reason for doing anything in particular and finds most of the causes for
which, at ordinary times, he was prepared to act and suffer, profoundly
uninteresting. He can't be bothered with them, for the good reason that he has
better things to think about.

These better things may be experienced (as I experienced them) "out there," or
"in here," or in both worlds, the inner and the outer, simultaneously or
successively. That they are better seems to be self- evident to ah mescahn
takers who come to the dmg with a sound hver and an untroubled mind.

These effects of mescahn are the sort of effects you could expect to fohow the
administration of a dmg having the power to impair the efficiency of the
cerebral reducing valve. When the brain mns out of sugar, the undernourished ego
grows weak, can't be bothered to undertake the necessary chores, and loses ah
interest in those spatial and temporal relationships which mean so much to an
organism bent on getting on in the world. As Mind at Large seeps past the no
longer watertight valve, ah kinds of biologicahy useless things start to happen.
In some cases there may be extra-sensory perceptions. Other persons discover a
world of visionary beauty. To others again is revealed the glory, the infinite
value and meaningfulness of naked existence, of the given, unconceptuahzed
event. In the final stage of egolessness there is an "obscure knowledge" that
All is in ah - that Ah is aetuahy each. This is as near, I take it, as a finite
mind can ever come to "perceiving everything that is happening everywhere in the
universe."

In this context, how significant is the enormous heightening, under mescahn, of
the perception of color! For certain animals it is biologicahy very important to
be able to distinguish certain hues. But beyond the lim its of their utihtarian
spectmm, most creatures are completely color blind. Bees, for example, spend
most of their time "deflowering the fresh virgins of the spring"; but, as Von
Frisch has shown, they can recognize only a very few colors. Man's highly
developed color sense is a biological




8



luxury - inestimably precious to him as an intellectual and spiritual being, but
unnecessary to his survival as an an im al. To judge by the adjectives which
Homer puts into their mouths, the heroes of the Trojan War hardly excelled the
bees in their capacity to distinguish colors. In this respect, at least, man kin
d’s advance has been prodigious.

Mescalin raises all colors to a higher power and makes the percipient aware of
innumerable fine shades of difference, to which, at ordinary times, he is
completely bhnd. It would seem that, for Mind at Large, the so-called secondary
characters of things are primary. Unlike Locke, it evidently feels that colors
are more important, better worth attending to, than masses, positions and
dimensions. Like mescahn takers, many mystics perceive supematuraUy bri lli ant
colors, not only with the inward eye, but even in the objective world around
them. Similar reports are made by psychics and sensitives. There are certain
mediums to whom the mescalin taker's brief revelation is a matter, during long
periods, of daily and hourly experience.

From this long but indispensable excursion into the realm of theory, we may now
return to the miraculous facts - four bamboo chair legs in the middle of a room.
Lik e Wordsworth's daffodils, they brought all manner of wealth - the gift,
beyond price, of a new direct insight into the very Nature of Things, together
with a more modest treasure of understanding in the field, especially, of the
arts. A rose is a rose is a rose. But these chair legs were chair legs were St.
Michael and all angels. Four or five hours after the event, when the effects of
a cerebral sugar shortage were wearing off, I was taken for a httle tour of the
city, which included a visit, towards sundown, to what is modestly claimed to be
the World's Biggest Dmg Store. At the back of the W.B.D.S., among the toys, the
greeting cards and the comics, stood a row, surprisingly enough, of art books. I
picked up the first volume that came to hand.  It was on Van Gogh, and the
picture at which the book opened was "The Chair" - that astounding portrait of a
Ding an Sich, which the mad painter saw, with a kin d of adoring terror, and
tried to render on his canvas. But it was a task to which the power even of
genius proved wholly inadequate. The chair Van Gogh had seen was obviously the
same in essence as the chair I had seen. But, though incomparably more real than
the chairs of ordinary perception, the chair in his picture remained no more
than an unusually expressive symbol of the fact. The fact had been manifested
Suchness; this was only an emblem. Such emblems are sources of hue knowledge
about the Nature of Things, and this hue knowledge may serve to prepare the mind
which accepts it for immediate insights on its own account.  But that is all.
However expressive, symbols can never be the things they stand for.

It would be interesting, in this context, to make a study of the works of art
available to the great knowers of Suchness. What sort of pictures did Eckhart
look at? What sculptures and paintings played a part in the rehgious experience
of St. John of the Cross, of Hakuin, of Hui-neng, of Wi lli am Law? The
questions are beyond my power to answer; but I strongly suspect that most of the
great knowers of Suchness paid very httle attention to art - some refusing to
have anything to do with it at ah, others being content with what a critical eye
would regard as second-rate, or even, tenth-rate, works. (To a person whose
transfigured and transfiguring mind can see the Ah in every this, the
first-rateness or tenth- rateness of even a rehgious painting wih be a matter of
the most sovereign indifference.) Art, I suppose, is only for beginners, or else
for those resolute dead-enders, who have made up their minds to be content with
the ersatz of Suchness, with symbols rather than with what they signify, with
the elegantly composed recipe in heu of actual dinner. I returned the Van Gogh
to its rack and picked up the volume standing next to it. It was a book on
Botticehi. I turned the pages. "The Birth of Venus"-never one of my favorites.
"Mars and Venus," that lovehness so passionately denounced by poor Ruskin at the
height of his long-drawn sexual tragedy. The marvelously rich and intricate
"Calumny of Apelles." And then a somewhat less familiar and not very good
picture, "Judith." My attention was arrested and I gazed in




9



fascination, not at the pale neurotic heroine or her attendant, not at the
victim's hairy head or the vernal landscape in the background, but at the
purplish silk of Judith's pleated bodice and long wind-blown skirts.

This was something I had seen before-seen that very morning, between the flowers
and the furniture, when I looked down by ehance, and went on passionately
staring by ehoice, at my own erossed legs. Those folds in the trousers - what a
labyrinth of endlessly significant complexity! And the texture of the gray
flannel - how lieh, how deeply, mysteriously sumptuous! And here they were
again, in BottieeUi's pieture.

Civihzed human beings wear clothes, therefore there ean be no portraiture, no
mythologieal or historical storyteUing without representations of folded
textiles. But though it may account for the origins, mere tailoring ean never
explain the luxuriant development of drapery as a major theme of all the plastie
arts. Artists, it is obvious, have always loved drapery for its own sake - or,
rather, for their own. When you paint or earve drapery, you are painting or
carving forms which, for all practical purposes, are non- representational-the
kind of uneonditioned forms on which artists even in the most naturahstie
tradition tike to let themselves go. In the average Madonna or Apostle the
strietly human, fuUy representational element aeeounts for about ten per eent of
the whole. All the rest eonsists of many eolored variations on the inexhaustible
theme of cmmpled wool or hnen. And these non-representational nine-tenths of a
Madonna or an Apostle may be just as important quahtatively as they are in
quantity. Very often they set the tone of the whole work of art, they state the
key in whieh the theme is being rendered, they express the mood, the
temperament, the attitude to hfe of the artist. Stoieal serenity reveals itself
in the smooth surfaces, the broad untortured folds of Piero's draperies. Tom
between fact and wish, between cynicism and idealism, Bernini tempers the aU but
caricatural veiisimihtude of his faces with enormous sartorial abstraetions,
whieh are the embodiment, in stone or bronze, of the everlasting eommonplaees of
rhetoiie - the heroism, the hohness, the sublimity to whieh man kin d
perpetually aspires, for the most part in vain. And here are El Greco's
disquietingly visceral skirts and mantles; here are the sharp, twisting, flame-
lik e folds in which Cosimo Tura clothes his figures: in the first, traditional
spirituality breaks down into a nameless physiologieal yearning; in the seeond,
there writhes an agonized sense of the world's essential strangeness and
hostihty. Or eonsider Watteau; his men and women play lutes, get ready for balls
and harlequinades, embark, on velvet lawns and under noble trees, for the
Cythera of every lover's dream; their enormous melancholy and the flayed,
exemciating sensibihty of their creator find expression, not in the aetions
reeorded, not in the gestures and the faees portrayed, but in the rehef and
texture of their taffeta skirts, their satin eapes and doublets. Not an ineh of
smooth surfaee here, not a moment of peace or eonfidence, only a si lk en
wilderness of eountless tiny pleats and wrinkles, with an incessant modulation -
inner uncertainty rendered with the perfeet assuranee of a master hand - of tone
into tone, of one indeterminate eolor into another. In life, man proposes, God
disposes. In the plastie arts the proposing is done by the subject matter; that
whieh disposes is ultimately the artist's temperament, proximately (at least in
portraiture, history and genre) the carved or painted drapery.  Between them,
these two may decree that a fete galante shall move to tears, that a cmcifixion
shall be serene to the point of eheerfiilness, that a stigmatization shall be
almost intolerably sexy, that the lik eness of a prodigy of female brainlessness
(I am thinking now of Ingres' incomparable Mme. Moitessier) shall express the
austerest, the most uncompromising intellectuality.

But this is not the whole story. Draperies, as I had now discovered, are much
more than devices for the introduetion of non-representational forms into
naturahstie paintings and seulptures. What the rest of us see only under the
influenee of meseahn, the artist is eongenitaUy equipped to see ah the time. His
perception is not lim ited to what is biologieaUy or soeiaUy useful. A tittle of
the knowledge belonging to




10



Mind at Large oozes past the reducing valve of brain and ego, into his
consciousness. It is a knowledge of the intrinsic significance of every
existent. For the artist as for the mescahn taker draperies are hving
hieroglyphs that stand in some pecuharly expressive way for the unfathomable
mystery of pure being.  More even than the chair, though less perhaps than those
whoUy supernatural flowers, the folds of my gray flannel trousers were charged
with "is-ness." To what they owed this privileged status, I cannot say.  Is it,
perhaps, because the forms of folded drapery are so strange and dramatic that
they catch the eye and in this way force the miraculous fact of sheer existence
upon the attention? Who knows? What is important is less the reason for the
experience than the experience itself. Poring over Judith's skirts, there in the
World's Biggest Dmg Store, I knew that Botticelh - and not BotticeUi alone, but
many others too-had looked at draperies with the same transfigured and
transfiguring eyes as had been mine that morning. They had seen the Istigkeit,
the AUness and I nf inity of folded cloth and had done their best to render it
in paint or stone. Necessarily, of course, without success. For the glory and
the wonder of pure existence belong to another order, beyond the Power of even
the highest art to express. But in Judith's s kir t I could clearly see what, if
I had been a painter of genius, I might have made of my old gray flannels. Not
much, heaven knows, in comparison with the reahty, but enough to dehght
generation after generation of beholders, enough to make them understand at
least a httle of the hue significance of what, in our pathetic imbecility, we
caU "mere things" and disregard in favor of television.

"This is how one ought to see," I kept saying as I looked down at my trousers,
or glanced at the jeweled books in the shelves, at the legs of my infinitely
more than Van-Goghian chair. "This is how one ought to see, how things really
are." And yet there were reservations. For if one always saw like this, one
would never want to do anything else. Just looking, just being the divine
Not-self of flower, of book, of chair, of flannel. That would be enough. But in
that case what about other people? What about human relations? In the recording
of that morning's conversations I find the question constantly repeated, "What
about human relations?" How could one reconcile this timeless bhss of seeing as
one ought to see with the temporal duties of doing what one ought to do and
feeling as one ought to feel? "One ought to be able," I said, "to see these
trousers as infinitely important and human beings as stiU more i nf initely
important." One ought-but in practice it seemed to be impossible. This
participation in the manifest glory of things left no room, so to speak, for the
ordinary, the necessary concerns of human existence, above all for concerns
involving persons. For Persons are selves and, in one respect at least, I was
now a Not- self, simultaneously perceiving and being the Not-self of the things
around me. To this new-born Not- self, the behavior, the appearance, the very
thought of the self it had momentarily ceased to be, and of other selves, its
one-time fellows, seemed not indeed distasteful (for distastefiilness was not
one of the categories in terms of which I was thinking), but enormously
irrelevant. Compelled by the investigator to analyze and report on what I was
doing (and how I longed to be left alone with Eternity in a flower.  Infinity in
four chair legs and the Absolute in the folds of a pair of flannel trousers!), I
reahzed that I was dehberately avoiding the eyes of those who were with me in
the room, dehberately refraining from being too much aware of them. One was my
wife, the other a man I respected and greatly liked; but both belonged to the
world from which, for the moment, mescahn had dehvered me "e world of selves, of
time, of moral judgments and utihtarian considerations, the world (and it was
this aspect of human hfe which I wished, above all else, to forget) of
self-assertion, of cocksureness, of overvalued words and idolatrously worshiped
notions.

At this stage of the proceedings I was handed a large colored reproduction of
the well-known self- portrait by C6zanne-the head and shoulders of a man in a
large straw hat, red-cheeked, red-lipped, with rich black whiskers and a dark
unfriendly eye. It is a magnificent painting; but it was not as a painting that
I now saw it. For the head promptly took on a third dimension and came to hfe as
a smah




11



gobUn-like man looking out through a window in the page before me. I started to
laugh. And when they asked me why, "What pretensions!" I kept repeating. "Who on
earth does he think he is?" The question was not addressed to Cezanne in
partieular, but to the human species at large. Who did they all think they were?

"It's like Arnold Bennett in the Dolomites," I said, suddenly remembering a
scene, happily immorta liz ed in a snapshot, of A.B., some four or five years
before his death, toddling along a wintry road at Cortina d'Ampezzo. Around him
lay the virgin snow; in the background was a more than gothic aspiration of red
crags. And there was dear, kind, unhappy A.B., consciously overacting the role
of his favorite character in fiction, himself, the Card in person. There he
went, toddhng slowly in the bright Alpine sunshine, his thumbs in the armholes
of a yellow waistcoat which bulged, a httle lower down, with the graceful curve
of a Regency bow window at Brighton - his head thrown back as though to aim some
stammered utterance, howitzer-hke, at the blue dome of heaven. What he actually
said, I have forgotten; but what his whole manner, air and posture fairly
shouted was, "I'm as good as those damned mountains." And in some ways, of
course, he was i nf initely better; but not, as he knew very well, in the way
his favorite character in fiction lik ed to imagine.

Successfully (whatever that may mean) or unsuccessfully, we all overact the part
of our favorite character in fiction. And the fact, the almost infinitely
unlikely fact, of actually being Cezanne makes no difference. For the consummate
painter, with his httle pipehne to Mind at Large by-passing the brain valve and
ego-filter, was also and just as genuinely this whiskered goblin with the
unfriendly eye. For rehef I turned back to the folds in my trousers. "This is
how one ought to see," I repeated yet again. And I might have added,' 'These are
the sort of things one ought to look at." Things without pretensions, satisfied
to be merely themselves, sufficient in their Suchness, not acting a part, not
trying, insanely, to go it alone, in isolation from the Dharma-Body, in
Lucifeiian defiance of the grace of god.

"The nearest approach to this," I said, "would be a Vermeer."

Yes, a Vermeer. For that mysterious artist was tmly gifted- with the vision that
perceives the Dharma-Body as the hedge at the bottom of the garden, with the
talent to render as much of that vision as the lim itations of human capacity
permit, and with the pmdence to confine himself in his paintings to the more
manageable aspects of reahty; for though Vermeer represented human beings, he
was always a painter of stiU life. Cezanne, who told his female sitters to do
their best to look like apples, tried to paint portraits in the same spirit. But
his pippin-hke women are more nearly related to Plato's Ideas than to the
Dharma-Body in the hedge. They are Eternity and Infinity seen, not in sand or
flower, but in the abstractions of some very superior brand of geometry. Vermeer
never asked his girls to look lik e apples. On the contrary, he insisted on
their being girls to the very lim it - but always with the proviso that they
refrain from behaving girhshly. They might sit or quietly stand but never
giggle, never display self-consciousness, never say their prayers or pine for
absent sweethearts, never gossip, never gaze enviously at other women's babies,
never dirt, never love or hate or work. In the act of doing any of these things
they would doubtless become more intensely themselves, but would cease, for that
very reason, to manifest their divine essential Not-self. In Blake's phrase, the
doors of Vermeer's perception were only partially cleansed. A single panel had
become almost perfectly transparent; the rest of the door was stiU muddy. The
essential Not-self could be perceived very clearly in things and in hving
creatures on the hither side of good and evil. In human beings it was visible
only when they were in repose, their minds untroubled, their bodies motionless.
In these circumstances Vermeer could see Suchness in all its heavenly beauty -
could see and, in some small measure, render it-in a subtle and sumptuous StiU
fife. Vermeer is undoubtedly the greatest painter of human stiU Uves. But there
have been others, for example, Vermeer's French contemporaries, the Le Nain
brothers. They set out, I suppose.




12



to be genre painters; but what they aetuaUy produced was a series of human stiU
hves, in which their cleansed perception of the infinite significance of aU
things is rendered not, as with Vermeer, by subtle enrichment of color and
texture, but by a heightened clarity, an obsessive distinctness of form, within
an austere, almost monochromatic tonality. In our own day we have had VuiUard,
the painter, at his best, of unforgettably splendid pictures of the Dharma-Body
manifested in a bourgeois bedroom, of the Absolute blazing away in the midst of
some stockbroker's family in a suburban garden, taking tea.

Ce qui fait que I'ancien bandagiste renie

Le compioir dont le faste allechait les passants,

C'est son jardin d'Auteuil, ou, veufs de tout encens,

Les Zinnias ont Fair d'etre en tole vernie.

For Laurent Tailhade the spectacle was merely obscene. But if the retired rubber
goods merchant had sat stiU enough, VuiUard would have seen in him only the
Dharma-Body, would have painted, in the zinnias, the goldfish pool, the villa's
Moorish tower and Chinese lanterns, a comer of Eden before the FaU.

But meanwhile my question remained unanswered. How was this cleansed perception
to be reconciled with a proper concern with human relations, with the necessary
chores and duties, to say nothing of charity and practical compassion? The
age-old debate between the actives and the contemplatives was being renewed -
renewed, so far as I was concerned, with an unprecedented poignancy. For until
this morning I had known contemplation only in its humbler, its more ordinary
forms
- as discursive thinking; as a rapt absorption in poetry or painting or music;
  as a patient waiting upon those inspirations, without which even the prosiest
  writer cannot hope to accomplish anything; as occasional glimpses, in Nature,
  of Wordsworth's "something far more deeply interfused"; as systematic silence
  leading, sometimes, to hints of an "obscure knowledge." But now I knew
  contemplation at its height. At its height, but not yet in its fullness. For
  in its fullness the way of Mary includes the way of Martha and raises it, so
  to speak, to its own higher power. MescaUn opens up the way of Mary, but shuts
  the door on that of Martha. It gives access to contemplation - but to a
  contemplation that is incompatible with action and even with the wiU to
  action, the very thought of action. In the intervals between his revelations
  the mescahn taker is apt to feel that, though in one way everything is
  supremely as it should be, in another there is something wrong. His problem is
  essentially the same as that which confronts the quietist, the arhat and, on
  another level, the landscape painter and the painter of human stiU hves.
  MescaUn can never solve that problem; it can only pose it, apocalypticaUy, for
  those to whom it had never before presented itself. The fuU and final solution
  can be found only by those who are prepared to implement the right kind of
  Welranschauung by means of the right kind of behavior and the right kind of
  constant and unstrained alertness. Over against the quietist stands the
  active-contemplative, the saint, the man who, in Eckhart's phrase, is ready to
  come down from the seventh heaven in order to bring a cup of water to his sick
  brother. Over against the arhat, retreating from ap- pearances into an
  entirely transcendental Nirvana, stands the Bodhisattva, for whom Suchness and
  the world of contingencies are one, and for whose boundless compassion every
  one of those contingencies is an occasion not only for transfiguring insight,
  but also for the most practical charity. And in the universe of art, over
  against Vermeer and the other Painters of human stiU Uves, over against the
  masters of Chinese and Japanese landscape painting, over against Constable and
  Turner, against Sisley and Seurat and Cezanne, stands the aU-inclusive art of
  Rembrandt. These are enormous names, inaccessible eminences.  For myself, on
  this memorable May morning, I could only be grateful for an experience which
  had




13

shown me, more clearly than I had ever seen it before, the tme nature of the
challenge and the completely hberating response.

Let me add, before we leave this subject, that there is no form of
contemplation, even the most quietistic, which is without its ethical values.
Half at least of aU morahty is negative and consists in keeping out of mischief.
The Lord's Prayer is less than fifty words long, and six of those words are
devoted to asking God not to lead us into temptation. The one-sided
contemplative leaves undone many things that he ought to do; but to make up for
it, he refrains from doing a host of things he ought not to do. The sum of evU,
Pascal remarked, would be much diminished if men could only learn to sit quietly
in their rooms. The contemplative whose perception has been cleansed does not
have to stay in his room.  He can go about his business, so completely satisfied
to see and be a part of the divine Order of Things that he wiU never even be
tempted to indulge in what Traherne called "the dirty Devices of the world."
When we feel ourselves to be sole heirs of the universe, when "the sea flows in
our veins ... and the stars are our jewels," when aU things are perceived as i
nf inite and holy, what motive can we have for covetousness or self-assertion,
for the pursuit of power or the drearier forms of pleasure?  Contemplatives are
not likely to become gamblers, or procurers, or dmnkards; they do not as a mle
preach intolerance, or make war; do not find it necessary to rob, swindle or
grind the faces of the poor.  And to these enormous negative virtues we may add
another which, though hard to define, is both positive and important. The arhat
and the quietist may not practice contemplation in its fullness; but if they
practice it at aU, they may bring back enlightening reports of another, a
transcendent country of the mind; and if they practice it in the height, they
wiU become conduits through which some beneficent influence can how out of that
other country into a world of darkened selves, chronically dying for lack of it.

Meanwhile I had turned, at the investigator's request, from the portrait of
Cezanne to what was going on, inside my head, when I shut my eyes. This time,
the inscape was curiously unrewarding. The field of vision was fi ll ed with
brightly colored, constandy changing sfructures that seemed to be made of
plastic or enameled tin.

"Cheap," I commented. "Trivial. Like things in a five-and-ten." And aU this
shoddiness existed in a closed, cramped universe. "Ifs as though one were below
decks in a ship," I said. "A five-and-ten-cent ship." And as I looked, it became
very clear that this five-and-ten-cent ship was in some way connected with human
pretensions, with the portrait of Cezanne, with A.B. among the Dolomites
overacting his favorite character in fiction. This suffocating interior of a
dime-store ship was my own personal self; these gimcrack mobiles of tin and
plastic were my personal contributions to the universe. I felt the lesson to be
salutary, but was sorry, none the less, that it had had to be administered at
this moment and in this form. As a mle the mescahn taker discovers an inner
world as manifestly a datum, as self-evidently "i nf inite and holy," as that
transfgured outer world which I had seen with my eyes open. From the first, my
own case had been different. Mescahn had endowed me temporarily with the power
to see things with my eyes shut; but it could not, or at least on this occasion
did not, reveal an inscape remotely comparable to my flowers or chair or
flannels "out there." What it had allowed me to perceive inside was not the
Dharma-Body, in images, but my own mind; not Suchness, but a set of symbols - in
other words, a homemade substitute for Suchness.

Most visual i ze rs are transformed by mescahn into visionaries. Some of them -
and they are Perhaps more numerous than is generaUy supposed - require no
transformation; they are visionaries ah the time.  The mental species to which
Blake belonged is fairly widely distributed even in the urban-industrial
societies of the present day. The poet-artist's uniqueness does not consist in
the fact that (to quote from his Descriptive Catalogue) he actuaUy saw "those
wonderful originals caUed in the Sacred Scriptures the




14



Cherubim." It does not consist in the fact that "these wonderful originals seen
in my visions, were some of them one hundred feet in height ... aU containing
mythological and recondite meaning." It consists solely in his abihty to render,
in words or (somewhat less successfully) in hne and color, some hint at least of
a not excessively uncommon experience. The untalented visionary may perceive an
inner reahty no less tremendous, beautiful and significant than the world beheld
by Blake; but he lacks altogether the abihty to express, in hterary or plastic
symbols, what he has seen.

From the records of rehgion and the surviving menuments of poetry and the
plastic arts it is very plain that, at most times and in most places, men have
attached more importance to the inscape than to objective existents, have felt
that what they saw with their eyes shut possessed a spirituaUy higher
significance than what they saw with their eyes open. The reason? Famiharity
breeds contempt, and how to survive is a problem ranging in urgency from the
chronically tedious to the excmciating. The outer world is what we wake up to
every morning of our hves, is the place where, wiUy-niUy, we must try to make
our hving. In the inner world there is neither work nor monotony. We visit it
only in dreams and musings, and its strangeness is such that we never find the
same world on two successive occasions.  What wonder, then, if human beings in
their search for the divine have generally preferred to look within! Generally,
but not always. In their art no less than in their rehgion, the Taoists and the
Zen Buddhists looked beyond visions to the Void, and through the Void at "the
ten thousand things" of objective reahty. Because of their doctrine of the Word
made flesh, Christians should have been able, from the first, to adopt a similar
attitude towards the universe around them. But because of the doctrine of the
Fah, they found it very hard to do so. As recently as three hundred years ago an
expression of thoroughgoing world denial and even world condemnation was both
orthodox and comprehensible.  "We should feel wonder at nothing at ah in Nature
except only the Incarnation of Christ." In the seventeenth century, Lahemanfs
phrase seemed to make sense. Today it has the ring of madness.

In China the rise of landscape painting to the rank of a major art form took
place about a thousand, in Japan about six hundred and in Europe about three
hundred, years ago. The equation of Dharma- Body with hedge was made by those
Zen Masters, who wedded Taoist naturahsm with Buddhist transcendentalism. It
was, therefore, only in the Far East that landscape painters consciously
regarded their art as rehgious. In the West religious painting was a matter of
portraying sacred personages, of illustrating hallowed texts. Eandscape painters
regarded themselves as secularists. Today we recognize in Seurat one of the
supreme masters of what may be called mystical landscape painting. And yet this
man who was able, more effectively than any other, to render the One in the
many, became quite indignant when somebody praised him for the "poetry" of his
work. T merely apply the System," he protested. In other words he was merely a
pointiUiste and, in his own eyes, nothing else. A similar anecdote is told of
John Constable. One day towards the end of his life, Blake met Constable at
Hampstead and was shown one of the younger artisf s sketches. In spite of his
contempt for naturahstic art, the old visionary knew a good thing when be saw
it-except of course, when it was by Rubens. 'This is not drawing," he cried,
"this is inspiration!" "I had meant it to be drawing," was Constable's
characteristic answer. Both men were right. It was drawing, precise and
veracious, and at the same time it was inspiration - inspiration of an order at
least as high as Blake's. The pine trees on the Heath had actually been seen as
identical with the Dharma-Body. The sketch was a rendering, necessarily
imperfect but still profoundly impressive, of what a cleansed perception had
revealed to the open eyes of a great painter. Erom a contemplation, in the
tradition of Wordsworth and Whitman, of the Dharma- Body as hedge, and from
visions, such as Blake's, of the "wonderful originals" within the mind,
contemporary poets have retreated into an investigation of the personal, as
opposed to the more than personal, subconscious and to a rendering, in highly
abstract terms, not of the given, objective fact, but




15



of mere scientific and theological notions. And something similar has happened
in the held of painting, where we have witnessed a general retreat from
landscape, the predominant art form of the nineteenth century. This retreat from
landscape has not been into that other, inner divine Datum, with which most of
the traditional schools of the past were concerned, that Archetypal World, where
men have always found the raw materials of myth and rehgion. No, it has been a
retreat from the outward Datum into the personal subconscious, into a mental
world more squahd and more tightly closed than even the world of conscious
personahty. These contraptions of tin and highly colored plastic - where had I
seen them before? In every picture gallery that exhibits the latest in
nonrepresentational art. And now someone produced a phonograph and put a record
on the turntable. I hstened with pleasure, but experienced nothing comparable to
my seen apocalypses of flowers or flannel. Would a naturally gifted musician
hear the revelations which, for me, had been exclusively visual? It would be
interesting to make the experiment. Meanwhile, though not transfigured, though
retaining its normal quahty and intensity, the music contributed not a little to
my understanding of what had happened to me and of the wider problems which
those happenings had raised.

Instrumental music, oddly enough, left me rather cold. Mozart's C-Minor Piano
Concerto was interrupted after the first movement, and a recording of some
madrigals by Gesualdo took its place.

"These voices," I said appreciatively, "these voices - they're a kind of bridge
back to the human world." And a bridge they remained even while singing the most
starthngly chromatic of the mad prince's compositions. Through the uneven
phrases of the madrigals, the music pursued its course, never sticking to the
same key for two bars together. In Gesualdo, that fantastic character out of a
Webster melodrama, psychological disintegration had exaggerated, had pushed to
the extreme limit, a tendency inherent in modal as opposed to fuUy tonal music.
The resulting works sounded as though they might have been written by the later
Schoenberg.

"And yet," I felt myself constrained to say, as I hstened to these strange
products of a Counter- Reformation psychosis working upon a late medieval art
form, "and yet it does not matter that he's ah in bits. The whole is
disorganized. But each individual fragment is in order, is a representative of a
Higher Order. The Highest Order prevails even in the disintegration. The totahty
is present even in the broken pieces. More clearly present, perhaps, than in a
completely coherent work. At least you aren't lulled into a sense of false
security by some merely human, merely fabricated order. You have to rely on your
immediate perception of the ultimate order. So in a certain sense disintegration
may have its advantages.  But of course it's dangerous, horribly dangerous.
Suppose you couldn't get back, out of the chaos ..."

From Gesualdo's madrigals we jumped, across a gulf of three centuries, to Alban
Berg and the Lyric Suire. "This" I announced in advance, "is going to be heU."

But, as it turned out, I was wrong. Actually the music sounded rather fiinny.
Dredged up from the personal subconscious, agony succeeded twelve-tone agony;
but what shuck me was only the essential incongmity between a psychological
disintegration even completer than Gesualdo's and the prodigious resources, in
talent and technique, employed in its expression.

"Isn't he sorry for himself!" I commented with a derisive lack of sympathy. And
then, "Katzenmusik
- learned Katzenmusik." And finally, after a few more minutes of the anguish,
  "Who cares what his feelings are? Why can't he pay attention to something
  else?" As a criticism of what is undoubtedly a very remarkable work, it was
  unfair and inadequate - but not, I think, irrelevant. I cite it for what it is
  worth and because that is how, in a state of pure contemplation, I reacted to
  the Lyric Suite.

When it was over, the investigator suggested a walk in the garden. I was
willing; and though my body seemed to have dissociated itself almost completely
from my mind - or, to be more accurate, though my awareness of the transfigured
outer world was no longer accompanied by an awareness of




16



my physical organism -I found myself able to get up, open the French window and
walk out with only a min im um of hesitation. It was odd, of course, to feel
that "I" was not the same as these arms and legs "out there," as this whoUy
objective hunk and neck and even head. It was odd; but one soon got used to it.
And anyhow the body seemed perfectly well able to look after itself. In reahty,
of course, it always does look after itself. AU that the conscious ego can do is
to formulate wishes, which are then carried out by forces which it controls very
httle and understands not at aU. When it does anything more -when it tries too
hard, for example, when it worries, when it becomes apprehensive about the
future -it lowers the effectiveness of those forces and may even cause the
devitalized body to faU iU. In my present state, awareness was not referred to
as ego; it was, so to speak, on its own. This meant that the physiological
inteUigence controlling the body was also on its own. For the moment that
interfering neurotic who, in waking hours, tries to mn the show, was blessedly
out of the way.

From the French window I walked out under a kind of pergola covered in part by a
climbing rose tree, in part by laths, one inch wide with half an inch of space
be tween them. The sun was shining and the shadows of the laths made a
zebra-like pattern on the ground and across the seat and back of a garden chair,
which was standing at this end of the pergola. That chair -shall I ever forget
it? Where the shadows fell on the canvas upholstery, stripes of a deep but
glowing indigo alternated with stripes of an incandescence so intensely bright
that it was hard to beheve that they could be made of anything but blue fire.
For what seemed an immensely long time I gazed without knowing, even without
wishing to know, what it was that confronted me. At any other time I would have
seen a chair barred with alternate light and shade. Today the percept had
swallowed up the concept. I was so completely absorbed in looking, so
thunderstmck by what I actually saw, that I could not be aware of anything else.
Garden furniture, laths, sunlight, shadow - these were no more than names and
notions, mere verbahzations, for utihtarian or scientific purposes, after the
event. The event was this succession of azure furnace doors separated by gulfs
of unfathomable gentian. It was inexpressibly wonderful, wonderful to the point,
almost, of being terrifying. And suddenly I had an inkhng of what it must feel
like to be mad.  Schizophrenia has its heavens as well as its hells and
purgatories. I remember what an old friend, dead these many years, told me about
his mad wife. One day in the early stages of the disease, when she stiU had her
lucid intervals he had gone to talk to her about their children. She hstened for
a time, then cut him short. How could he bear to waste his time on a couple of
absent children, when all that really mattered, here and now, was the
unspeakable beauty of the patterns he made, in this brown tweed jacket, every
time he moved his arms? Alas, this Paradise of cleansed perception, of pure
one-sided contemplation, was not to endure. The bhssful intermissions became
rarer, became briefer, until finally there were no more of them; there was only
horror.

Most takers of mescahn experience only the heavenly part of schizophrenia. The
dmg brings heU and purgatory only to those who have had a recent case of
jaundice, or who suffer from periodical depressions or a chronic anxiety. If,
hke the other dmgs of remotely comparable power, mescalin were notoriously
toxic, the taking of it would be enough, of itself, to cause anxiety. But the
reasonably healthy person knows in advance that, so far as he is concerned,
mescahn is completely innocuous, that its effects wiU pass off after eight or
ten hours, leaving no hangover and consequently no craving for a renewal of the
dose. Fortified by this knowledge, he embarks upon the experiment without fear -
in other words, without any disposition to convert an unprecedentedly strange
and other than human experience into something appaUing, something actuaUy
diabohcal.

Confronted by a chair which looked like the Last Judgment - or, to be more
accurate, by a Last Judgment which, after a long time and with considerable
difficulty, I recognized as a chair - I found myself ah at once on the brink of
panic. This, I suddenly felt, was going too far. Too far, even though the




17



going was into intenser beauty, deeper significance. The fear, as I analyze it
in retrospect, was of being overwhelmed, of disintegrating under a pressure of
reahty greater than a mind, accustomed to hving most of the time in a cosy world
of symbols, could possibly bear. The hterature of rehgious experience abounds in
references to the pains and terrors overwhelming those who have come, too
suddenly, face to face with some manifestation of the Mysterium tremendum. In
theological language, this fear is due to the in- compatibihty between man's
egotism and the divine purity, between man's self-aggravated separateness and
the infinity of God. Following Boehme and Wi lli am Law, we may say that, by
unregenerate souls, the divine Light at its full blaze can be apprehended only
as a burning, purgatorial fire. An almost identical doctrine is to be found in
The Tibetan Book of the Dead, where the departed soul is described as shrinking
in agony from the Pure Light of the Void, and even from the lesser, tempered
Lights, in order to msh headlong into the comforting darkness of selfhood as a
reborn human being, or even as a beast, an unhappy ghost, a denizen of heU.
Anything rather than the burning brightness of unmitigated Reality - anything!

The schizophrenic is a soul not merely unregenerate, but desperately sick into
the bargain. His sickness consists in the inability to take refuge from inner
and outer reahty (as the sane person habituaUy does) in the homemade universe of
common sense - the strictly human world of useful notions, shared symbols and
sociaUy acceptable conventions. The schizophrenic is like a man permanently
under the influence of mescahn, and therefore unable to shut off the experience
of a reahty which he is not holy enough to hve with, which he cannot explain
away because it is the most stubborn of primary facts, and which, because it
never permits him to look at the world with merely human eyes, scares him into
interpreting its unremitting strangeness, its burning intensity of significance,
as the manifestations of human or even cosmic malevolence, cahing for the most
desperate countermeasures, from murderous violence at one end of the scale to
catatonia, or psychological suicide, at the other. And once embarked upon the
downward, the infernal road, one would never be able to stop. That, now, was
only too obvious.

"If you started in the wrong way," I said in answer to the investigator's
questions, "everything that happened would be a proof of the conspiracy against
you. It would all be self-validating. You couldn't draw a breath without knowing
it was part of the plot." "So you think you know where madness lies?"

My answer was a convinced and heartfelt, "Yes."

"And you couldn't control it?"

"No I couldn't control it. If one began with fear and hate as the major premise,
one would have to go on to the conclusion." "Would you be able," my wife asked,
"to fix your attention on what The Tibetan Book of The Dead calls the Clear
Light?" I was doubtful.

"Would it keep the evil away, if you could hold it? Or would you not be able to
hold it?"

I considered the question for some time. "Perhaps," I answered at last, "perhaps
I could - but only if there were somebody there to teU me about the Clear Light.
One couldn't do it by oneself. That's the point, I suppose, of the Tibetan
ritual - someone sitting there all the time and telling you whafs what."

After listening to the record of this part of the experiment, I took down my
copy of Evans-Wentz's edition of The Tibetan Book of the Dead, and opened at
random. "O nobly bom, let not thy mind be distracted." That was the problem - to
remain undistracted. Undisfracted by the memory of past sins, by imagined
pleasure, by the bitter aftertaste of old wrongs and humihations, by all the
fears and hates and cravings that ordinarily echpse the Light. What those
Buddhist monks did for the dying and the dead, might not the modem psychiatrist
do for the insane? Let there be a voice to assure them, by day and even while
they are asleep, that in spite of all the terror, aU the bewilderment and
confusion, the ultimate Reahty remains unshakably itself and is of the same
substance as the inner tight of even the most cmeUy




18



tormented mind. By means of such devices as recorders, clock-controlled
switches, pubhc address systems and pillow speakers it should be very easy to
keep the inmates of even an understaffed institution constantly reminded of this
primordial fact. Perhaps a few of the lost souls might in this way be helped to
win some measure of control over the universe - at once beautiful and appalling,
but always other than human, always totally incomprehensible - in which they
find themselves condemned to five.

None too soon, I was steered away from the disquieting splendors of my garden
chair. Drooping in green parabolas from the hedge, the ivy fronds shone with a
kind of glassy, jade-hke radiance. A moment later a clump of Red Hot Pokers, in
fuU bloom, had exploded into my field of vision. So passionately alive that they
seemed to be standing on the very brink of utterance, the flowers strained
upwards into the blue. Lik e the chair under the laths, they protected too much.
I looked down at the leaves and discovered a cavernous intricacy of the most
delicate green fights and shadows, pulsing with undecipherable mystery.

Roses : The flowers are easy to paint. The leaves difficult.

Sh ik i's haiku (which I quote in R. H. Blyth's translation) expresses, by
indirection, exactly what I then felt - the excessive, the too obvious glory of
the flowers, as contrasted with the subtler miracle of their foliage.

We walked out into the street. A large pale blue automobile was standing at the
curb. At the sight of it, I was suddenly overcome by enormous merriment. What
complacency, what an absurd self- satisfaction beamed from those bulging
surfaces of glossiest enamel! Man had created the thing in his own image - or
rather in the image of his favorite character in fiction. I laughed till the
tears ran down my cheeks.

We re-entered the house. A meal had been prepared. Somebody, who was not yet
identical with myself, fell to with ravenous appetite. From a considerable
distance and without much interest, I looked on.

When the meal had been eaten, we got into the car and went for a drive. The
effects of the mescafin were already on the decline: but the flowers in the
gardens still trembled on the brink of being supernatural, the pepper trees and
carobs along the side streets still manifestly belonged to some sacred grove.
Eden alternated with Dodona. Yggdrasil with the mystic Rose. And then, abmptly,
we were at an intersection, waiting to cross Sunset Boulevard. Before us the
cars were rolling by in a steady stream - thousands of them, all bright and
shiny like an advertiser's dream and each more ludicrous than the last.  Once
again I was convulsed with laughter. The Red Sea of traffic parted at last, and
we crossed into another oasis of frees and lawns and roses. In a few minutes we
had cl im bed to a vantage point in the hills, and there was the city spread out
beneath us. Rather disappointingly, it looked very like the city I had seen on
other occasions. So far as I was concerned, transfiguration was proportional to
distance.  The nearer, the more divinely other. This vast, dim panorama was
hardly different from itself.

We drove on, and so long as we remained in the hills, with view succeeding
distant view, significance was at its everyday level, well below transfiguration
point. The magic began to work again only when we turned down into a new suburb
and were gliding between two rows of houses. Here, in spite of the peculiar
hideousness of the architecture, there were renewals of transcendental
otherness, hints of the morning's heaven. Brick chimneys and green composition
roofs glowed in the sunshine, lik e fragments of the New Jemsalem. And all at
once I saw what Guardi had seen and (with what incomparable skill) had so often
rendered in his paintings- a stucco wall with a shadow slanting across it, blank
but unforgettably beautiful, empty but charged with all the meaning and the
mystery of existence.  The revelation dawned and was gone again within a
fraction of a second. The car had moved on; time was uncovering another
manifestation of the eternal Suchness. "Within sameness there is difference. But




19

that difference should be different from sameness is in no wise the intention of
all the Buddhas. Their intention is both totahty and differentiation." This bank
of red and white geraniums, for example-it was entirely different from that
stucco wall a hundred yards up the road. But the "is-ness" of both was the same,
the eternal quahty of their transience was the same.

An hour later, with ten more miles and the visit to the World's Biggest Dmg
Store safely behind us, we were back at home, and I had returned to that
reassuring but profoundly unsatisfactory state known as "being in one's right
mind." That humanity at large will ever be able to dispense with Artificial
Paradises seems very unlikely. Most men and women lead lives at the worst so
painful, at the best so monotonous, poor and lim ited that the urge to escape,
the longing to transcend themselves if only for a few moments, is and has always
been one of the principal appetites of the soul. Art and rehgion, carnivals and
saturnalia, dancing and hstening to oratory -all these have served, in H. G.
Wells's phrase, as Doors in the Wall. And for private, far everyday use there
have always been chemical intoxicants. All the vegetable sedatives and
narcotics, all the euphoiics that grow on trees, the hallucinogens that ripen in
berries or can be squeezed from roots -all, without exception, have been known
and systematically used by human beings from time immemorial. And to these
natural modifiers of consciousness modem science has added its quota of
synthetics - chloral, for example, and benzedrine, the bromides and the
barbiturates.

Most of these modifiers of consciousness cannot now be taken except under
doctor's orders, or else illegally and at considerable risk. For unrestricted
use the West has permitted only alcohol and tobacco. All the other chemical
Doors in the Wall are labeled Dope, and their unauthorized takers are Fiends.

We now spend a good deal more on drink and smoke than we spend on education.
This, of course, is not surprising. The urge to escape from selfhood and the
environment is in almost everyone almost all the time. The urge to do something
for the young is strong only in parents, and in them only for the few years
during which their children go to school. Equally unsurprising is the current
attitude towards drink and smoke. In spite of the growing army of hopeless
alcohohcs, in spite of the hundreds of thousands of persons annually maimed or
ki ll ed by dmnken drivers, popular comedians stiU crack jokes about alcohol and
its addicts. And in spite of the evidence finking cigarettes with lung cancer,
practically everybody regards tobacco smoking as being hardly less normal and
natural than eating.  From the point of view of the rationalist utilitarian this
may seem odd. For the historian, it is exactly what you would expect. A firm
conviction of the material reality of Hell never prevented medieval Christians
from doing what their ambition, lust or covetousness suggested. Lung cancer,
traffic accidents and the mil li ons of miserable and misery-creating alcohohcs
are facts even more certain than was, in Dante's day, the fact of the Inferno.
But all such facts are remote and unsubstantial compared with the near, felt
fact of a craving, here and now, for release or sedation, for a drink or a
smoke.

Ours is the age, among other things, of the automobile and of rocketing
population. Alcohol is incompatible with safety on the roads, and its
production, like that of tobacco, condemns to virtual sterility many mi lli ons
of acres of the most fertile soil. The problems raised by alcohol and tobacco
cannot, it goes without saying, be solved by prohibition. The universal and
ever-present urge to self- transcendence is not to be abolished by slamming the
currently popular Doors in the Wall. The only reasonable policy is to open
other, better doors in the hope of inducing men and women to exchange their old
bad habits for new and less harmful ones. Some of these other, better doors wifi
be social and technological in nature, others religious or psychological, others
dietetic, educational, athletic. But the need for frequent chemical vacations
from intolerable sellhood and repulsive surroundings wifi undoubtedly remain.
What is needed is a new dmg which wifi relieve and console our suffering species




20



without doing more harm in the long mn than it does good in the short. Such a
dmg must be potent in minute doses and synthesizable. If it does not possess
these qualities, its production, like that of wine, beer, spirits and tobacco
will interfere with the raising of indispensable food and fibers. It must be
less toxic than opium or cocaine, less likely to produce undesirable social
consequences than alcohol or the barbiturates, less inimical to heart and lungs
than the tars and nicotine of cigarettes. And, on the positive side, it should
produce changes in consciousness more interesting, more intrinsically valuable
than mere sedation or dreaminess, delusions of omnipotence or release from
inhibition. To most people, mescalin is almost completely innocuous. U nlik e
alcohol, it does not drive the taker into the kind of uninhibited action which
results in brawls, crimes of violence and traffic accidents. A man under the
influence of mescalin quietly minds his own business. Moreover, the business he
minds is an experience of the most enhghtening kind, which does not have to be
paid for (and this is surely important) by a compensatory hangover. Of the
long-range consequences of regular mescahn taking we know very httle. The
Indians who consume peyote buttons do not seem to be physically or morally
degraded by the habit. However, the available evidence is stiU scarce and
sketchy.* Although obviously superior to cocaine, opium, alcohol and tobacco,
mescalin is not yet the ideal dmg. Along with the happily transfigured majority
of mescahn takers there is a minority that finds in the dmg only heU or
purgatory. Moreover, for a dmg that is to be used, like alcohol, for general
consumption, its effects last for an inconveniently long time. But chemistry and
physiology are capable nowadays of practicaUy anything. If the psychologists and
sociologists wiU define the ideal, the neurologists and pharmacologists can be
rehed upon to discover the means whereby that ideal can be reahzed or at least
(for perhaps this kind of ideal can never, in the very nature of things, be
fiilly reahzed) more nearly approached than in the wine-bibbing past, the
whisky- drinking, marijuana-smoking and barbiturate-swallowing present.

The urge to transcend self-conscious selfhood is, as I have said, a principal
appetite of the soul.  When, for whatever reason, men and women fail to
transcend themselves by means of worship, good works and spiritual exercises,
they are apt to resort to rehgion's chemical surrogates-alcohol and "goof pihs"
in the modem West, alcohol and opium in the East, hashish in the Mohammedan
world, alcohol and marijuana in Central America, alcohol and coca in the Andes,
alcohol and the barbiturates in the more up-to-date regions of South America. In
Poisons Sacres, Ivresses Divines Philippe de Fehce has written at length and
with a wealth of documentation on the immemorial connection between rehgion and
the taking of dmgs. Here, in summary or in direct quotation, are his
conclusions. The employment for rehgious purposes of toxic substances is
"extraordinarily widespread.... The practices studied in this volume can be
observed in every region of the earth, among primitives no less than among those
who have reached a high pitch of civihzation. We are therefore deahng not with
exceptional facts, which might justifiably be overlooked, but with a general
and, in the widest sense of the word, a human phenomenon, the kind of phenomenon
which cannot be disregarded by anyone who is trying to discover what rehgion is,
and what are the deep needs which it must satisfy."

Ideahy, everyone should be able to find self-transcendence in some form of pure
or apphed rehgion.  In practice it seems very unlikely that this hoped for
consummation wih ever be rea hz ed. There are, and doubtless there always will
be, good churchmen and good churchwomen for whom, unfortunately, piety is not
enough. The late G. K. Chesterton, who wrote at least as lyrically of drink as
of devotion, may serve as their eloquent spokesman.

The modem churches, with some exceptions among the Protestant denominations,
tolerate alcohol; but even the most tolerant have made no attempt to convert the
dmg to Christianity, or to sacramentahze its use. The pious drinker is forced to
take his rehgion in one compartment, his religion- surrogate in another. And
perhaps this is inevitable. Drinking cannot be sacramentahzed except in




21



religions which set no store on decorum. The worship of Dionysos or the Celtic
god of beer was a loud and disorderly affair. The rites of Christianity are
incompatible with even rehgious dmnkenness. This does no harm to the distillers,
but is very bad for Christianity. Countless persons desire self- transcendence
and would be glad to find it in church. But, alas, "the hungry sheep look up and
are not fed." They take part in rites, they listen to sermons, they repeat
prayers; but their thirst remains unassuaged. Disappointed, they turn to the
bottle. For a time at least and in a kind of way, it works.  Church may stiU be
attended; but it is no more than the Musical Bank of Butler's Erewhon. God may
still be acknowledged; but He is God only on the verbal level, only in a
strictly Pickwickian sense. The effective object of worship is the bottle and
the sole rehgious experience is that state of uninhibited and beUigerent
euphoria which foUows the ingestion of the third cocktail.

We see, then, that Christianity and alcohol do not and cannot mix. Christianity
and mescalin seem to be much more compatible. This has been demonstrated by many
tribes of Indians, from Texas to as far north as Wisconsin. Among these tribes
are to be found groups affihated with the Native American Church, a sect whose
principal rite is a kind of Early Christian agape, or love feast, where slices
of peyote take the place of the sacramental bread and wine. These Native
Americans regard the cactus as God's special gift to the Indians, and equate its
effects with the workings of the divine Spirit.

Professor J. S. Slotidn, one of the very few white men ever to have participated
in the rites of a Peyotist congregation, says of his fellow worshipers that they
are "certainly not stupefied or dmnk....  They never get out of rhythm or fumble
their words, as a dmnken or stupefied man would do.... They are all quiet,
courteous and considerate of one another. I have never been in any white man's
house of worship where there is either so much religious feehng or decomm." And
what, we may ask, are these devout and well-behaved Peyotists experiencing? Not
the mild sense of virtue which sustains the average Sunday churchgoer through
ninety minutes of boredom. Not even those high feehngs, inspired by thoughts of
the Creator and the Redeemer, the Judge and the Comforter, which animate the
pious.  Eor these Native Americans, rehgious experience is something more direct
and iUuminating, more spontaneous, less the homemade product of the superficial,
self-conscious mind. Sometimes (according to the reports collected by Dr.
Slotkin) they see visions, which may be of Christ H im self. Sometimes they hear
the voice of the Great Spirit. Sometimes they become aware of the presence of
God and of those personal shortcomings which must be corrected if they are to do
His wiU. The practical consequences of these chemical openings of doors into the
Other World seem to be wholly good. Dr.  Slotkin reports that habitual Peyotists
are on the whole more industrious, more temperate (many of them abstain
altogether from alcohol), more Peaceable than non-Peyotists. A tree with such
satisfactory fruits cannot be condemned out of hand as evil.

In sacramentahzing the use of peyote, the Indians of the Native American Church
have done something which is at once psychologically sound and historically
respectable. In the early centuries of Christianity many pagan rites and
festivals were baptized, so to say, and made to serve the purposes of the
Church. These joUifications were not particularly edifying; but they assuaged a
certain psychological hunger and, instead of trying to suppress them, the
earlier missionaries had the sense to accept them for what they were,
soul-satisfying expressions of fundamental urges, and to incorporate them into
the fabric of the new religion. What the Native Americans have done is
essentially similar. They have taken a pagan custom (a custom, incidentally, far
more elevating and enhghtening than most of the rather bmtish carousals and
mummeries adopted from European paganism) and given it a Christian significance.

Though but recently introduced into the northern United States, peyote-eating
and the rehgion based upon it have become important symbols of the red man's
right to spiritual independence. Some Indians have reacted to white supremacy by
becoming Americanized, others by retreating into




22



traditional Indianism. But some have tried to make the best of both worlds,
indeed of all the worlds -the best of Indianism, the best of Christianity, and
the best of those Other Worlds of transcendental experience, where the soul
knows itself as unconditioned and of tike nature with the divine. Hence the
Native American Church. In it two great appetites of the soul - the urge to
independence and self- determination and the urge to self-transcendence - were
fused with, and interpreted in the tight of, a third - the urge to worship, to
justify the ways of God to man, to explain the universe by means of a coherent
theology.

Lo, the poor Indian, whose untutored mind

Clothes him in front, but leaves h im bare behind.

But actually it is we, the rich and highly educated whites, who have left
ourselves bare behind. We cover our anterior nakedness with some
philosophy-Christian, Marxian, Freudo-Physicatist-but abaft we remain uncovered,
at the mercy of all the winds of circumstance. The poor Indian, on the other
hand, has had the wit to protect his rear by supplementing the fig leaf of a
theology with the breechcloth of transcendental experience.

I am not so foolish as to equate what happens under the influence of mescatin or
of any other dmg, prepared or in the future preparable, with the re aliz ation
of the end and ultimate purpose of human life: Enlightenment, the Beatific
Vision. All I am suggesting is that the mescatin experience is what Catholic
theologians call "a gratuitous grace," not necessary to salvation but
potentially helpful and to be accepted thankfully, if made available. To be
shaken out of the mts of ordinary perception, to be shown for a few timeless
hours the outer and the inner world, not as they appear to an animal obsessed
with survival or to a human being obsessed with words and notions, but as they
are apprehended, directly and unconditionally, by Mind at Large - this is an
experience of inestimable value to everyone and especially to the intellectual.
For the intellectual is by definition the man for whom, in Goethe's phrase, "the
word is essentially fmitful." He is the man who feels that "what we perceive by
the eye is foreign to us as such and need not impress us deeply." And yet,
though himself an intellectual and one of the supreme masters of language,
Goethe did not always agree with his own evaluation of the word. "We talk," he
wrote in middle life, "far too much. We should talk less and draw more. I
personally should tike to renounce speech altogether and, tike organic Nature,
communicate everything I have to say in sketches. That fig tree, this tittle
snake, the cocoon on my window sill quietly awaiting its future - all these are
momentous signatures. A person able to decipher their meaning properly would
soon be able to dispense with the written or the spoken word altogether. The
more I think of it, there is something futile, mediocre, even (I am tempted to
say) foppish about speech. By contrast, how the gravity of Nature and her
silence startle you, when you stand face to face with her, undistracted, before
a barren ridge or in the desolation of the ancient hills." We can never dispense
with language and the other symbol systems; for it is by means of them, and only
by their means, that we have raised ourselves above the bmtes, to the level of
human beings. But we can easily become the victims as well as the beneficiaries
of these systems. We must learn how to handle words effectively; but at the same
time we must preserve and, if necessary, intensify our ability to look at the
world directly and not through that half opaque medium of concepts, which
distorts every given fact into the all too familiar lik eness of some generic
label or explanatory abstraction.

Literary or scientific, liberal or specialist, all our education is
predominantly verbal and therefore fails to accomplish what it is supposed to
do. Instead of transforming children into fully developed adults, it turns out
students of the natural sciences who are completely unaware of Nature as the
primary




23

fact of experience, it i nfli cts upon the world students of the humanities who
know nothing of humanity, their own or anyone else's.

Gestalt psychologists, such as Samuel Renshaw, have devised methods for widening
the range and increasing the acuity of human perceptions. But do our educators
apply them? The answer is. No.

Teachers in every field of psyche-physical skill, from seeing to tennis, from
tightrope walking to prayer, have discovered, by trial and error, the conditions
of optimum functioning within their special fields. But have any of the great
Foundations financed a project for co-ordinating these empirical findings into a
general theory and practice of heightened creativeness? Again, so far as I am
aware, the answer is. No.

AU sorts of cultists and queer fish teach aU kinds of techniques for achieving
health, contentment, peace of mind; and for many of their hearers many of these
techniques are demonstrably effective. But do we see respectable psychologists,
philosophers and clergymen boldly descending into those odd and sometimes
malodorous weUs, at the bottom of which poor Tmth is so often condemned to sit?
Yet once more the answer is. No.

And now look at the history of mescahn research. Seventy years ago men of
first-rate abihty described the transcendental experiences which come to those
who, in good health, under proper conditions and in the right spirit, take the
dmg. How many philosophers, how many theologians, how many professional
educators have had the curiosity to open this Door in the WaU? The answer, for
aU practical purposes, is. None.

In a world where education is predominantly verbal, highly educated people find
it aU but impossible to pay serious attention to anything but words and notions.
There is always money for, there are always doctorates in, the learned foolery
of research into what, for scholars, is the all-important problem: Who
influenced whom to say what when? Even in this age of technology the verbal
humanities are honored.  The non-verbal humanities, the arts of being directly
aware of the given facts of our existence, ale almost completely ignored. A
catalogue, a bibhography, a definitive edition of a third-rate versier's
ipsissima verba, a stupendous index to end aU indexes - any genuinely
Alexandrian project is sure of approval and financial support: But when it comes
to finding out how you and I, our children and grandchildren, may become more
perceptive, more intensely aware of inward and outward reality, more open to the
Spirit, less apt, by psychological malpractices, to make ourselves physically
iU, and more capable of controUing our own autonomic nervous system - when it
comes to any form of non-verbal education more fundamental (and more likely to
be of some practical use) than Swedish drill, no really respectable person in
any really respectable university or church will do anything about it. Verbahsts
are suspicious of the non-verbal; rationahsts fear the given, non-rational fact;
intellectuals feel that "what we perceive by the eye (or in any other way) is
foreign to us as such and need not impress us deeply." Besides, this matter of
education in the non-verbal humanities will not fit into any of the estabhshed
pigeonholes. It is not rehgion, not neurology, not gymnastics, not morahty or
civics, not even experimental psychology.  This being so the subject is, for
academic and ecclesiastical purposes, non-existent and may safely be ignored
altogether or left, with a Patronizing smile, to those whom the Pharisees of
verbal orthodoxy call cranks, quacks, charlatans and unqualified amateurs. "I
have always found," Blake wrote rather bitterly, "that Angels have the vanity to
speak of themselves as the only wise. This they do with a confident insolence
sprouting from systematic reasoning." Systematic reasoning is something we could
not, as a species or as individuals, possibly do without. But neither, if we are
to remain sane, can we possibly do without direct perception, the more
unsystematic the better, of the inner and outer worlds into which we have been
bom. This given reahty is an infinite which passes aU understanding and yet
admits of being directly and in some sort totally apprehended. It is a
transcendence belonging to another order than the




24



human, and yet it may be present to us as a felt immanence, an experienced
participation. To be enlightened is to be aware, always, of total reahty in its
immanent otherness - to be aware of it and yet to remain in a condition to
survive as an animal, to think and feel as a human being, to resort whenever
expedient to systematic reasoning. Our goal is to discover that we have always
been where we ought to be. Unhappily we make the task exceedingly difficult for
ourselves. Meanwhile, however, there are gratuitous graces in the form of
partial and fleeting re aliz ations. Under a more reahstic, a less exclusively
verbal system of education than ours, every Angel (in Blake's sense of that
word) would be permitted as a sabbatical treat, would be urged and even, if
necessary, compelled to take an occasional trip through some chemical Door in
the Wall into the world of transcendental experience. If it terrified him, it
would be unfortunate but probably salutary. If it brought him a brief but
timeless illumination, so much the better. In either case the Angel might lose a
httle of the confident insolence sprouting from systematic reasoning and the
consciousness of having read all the books.

Near the end of his life Aquinas experienced Infused Contemplation. Thereafter
he refused to go back to work on his unfinished book. Compared with this,
everything he had read and argued about and written - Aristotle and the
Sentences, the Questions, the Propositions, the majestic Summas-was no better
than chaff or straw. For most intellectuals such a sit-down strike would be
inadvisable, even morally wrong. But the Angehc Doctor had done more systematic
reasoning than any twelve ordinary Angels, and was already ripe for death. He
had earned the right, in those last months of his mortahty, to turn away from
merely symbohc straw and chaff to the bread of actual and substantial Fact. For
Angels of a lower order and with better prospects of longevity, there must be a
return to the straw. But the man who comes back through the Door in the Wall
will never be quite the same as the man who went out.  He will be wiser but less
cocksure, happier but less self-satisfied, humbler in acknowledging his
ignorance yet better equipped to understand the relationship of words to things,
of systematic reasoning to the unfathomable Mystery which it tries, forever
vainly, to comprehend.
